---
layout: post
section-type: post
title: Quantum Key Distribution in 5 Minutes
category: tech
tags: [ 'crypto', 'quantum' ]
---

In this post I will attempt to explain a simplified variant of Quantum Key Distribution (QKD),
 while still highlighting all of the important ideas of the protocol.
I assume you at least recognise the terms cryptography and quantum.
Are you ready?

When dealing with protocols in cryptography, there is typically a secret
element, or key, which we would like to keep private. In the [one-time pad](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/One-time_pad), Alice and Bob must share
a key in advance before they can use it (once). Let's assume however, that we are masters
of quantum theory and don't care for [key encapsulation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Key_encapsulation); we don't
want to rely on [computational hardness](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computational_hardness_assumption).

The transition from bits to quantum bits (qubits) is not natural. Our
qubits can be in a superposition of 0's and 1's, for now you may just
believe that the qubit can encode information about both bits. Let's quickly
define some qubits:

<div>
  \begin{align}
    \ket{+} &= \dfrac{1}{\sqrt{2}}\left(\ket{0} + \ket{1}\right) \\
    \ket{-} &= \dfrac{1}{\sqrt{2}}\left(\ket{0} - \ket{1}\right) \\
    \ket{z} &= \ket{0} \\
  \end{align}
</div>

Now the key idea here is that when we measure a qubit, the outcome
of the measurement has an associated probability of that outcome occurring
(additionally, the probability may be 1). When we measure qubits, we
use a [special type](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-adjoint_operator) of operator (matrix). The numerical outcome
of a measurement is one of the operators eigenvalues, and we can
access this information by writing operators in their spectral decomposition:
<div>
  \begin{align}
    Z &= \ket{0}\bra{0} - \ket{1}\bra{1} \label{Z}\\
    X &= \ket{+}\bra{+} - \ket{-}\bra{-} \\
  \end{align}
</div>

Above, Z and X are operators. Moreover, we may use them for measurement.
Both have eigenvalues +1 and -1, which are multiplied with their associated
projector (e.g $\ket{0}\bra{0}$ is associated to eigenvalue 1 in Z). Measurement
in quantum information is very elegant, when you have accepted the notation. For
example, say we wish to find the probability of obtaining 1 when we
measure Z on $\ket{+}$:

<div>
  \begin{align}
    \text{Prob}\left(+1|Z\right) &= \bra{+}\ket{0}\bra{0}\ket{+} \\
                      &= \inner{+}{0}\left(\bra{0}\dfrac{1}{\sqrt{2}}
                        \left(\ket{0} + \ket{1}\right)\right) \\
                      &= \inner{+}{0}\left(\dfrac{1}{\sqrt{2}}
                        \left(\inner{0}{0} + \inner{0}{1}\right)\right) \\
                      &= \inner{+}{0}\dfrac{1}{\sqrt{2}} \\
                      &= \dfrac{1}{2} \label{square}
  \end{align}
</div>

Where in \ref{square} we have used the fact that $\inner{+}{0} = \inner{0}{+}^* $

Now back to Alice and Bob. Alice wants to share a secret bit string with Bob,
so she could just send out qubits either in the $\ket{0}$ or $\ket{1}$ state,
but this would be pointless because Eve could simply read them off with
Z and forward them on to Bob. Instead she must use a new encoding, let's
say that 0 maps to $\ket{0}$, but 1 maps to $\ket{+}$. Crucially what occurs
here is that, if Bob measures a -1 with Z, the qubit *could not* have
have been $\ket{0}$, since the associated projector is orthogonal to $\ket{0}$ (see \ref{Z}).
Similarly, if Bob measures a -1 with X, the qubit *could not* have been $\ket{+}$.
So Bob alternates between using Z or X, being sure of the encoding for those
qubits for which the measurement outcome was -1. If Bob measures a +1 with either, he gains no knowledge. To confirm their
shared secret, Bob informs Alice which qubits he was able to accurately
"decode", and they now share a secret.

But what if Eve attempts some eavesdropping on the qubits? Well,
qubits [cannot be copied](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/No-cloning_theorem), furthermore
if she performs a measurement, the qubit will collapse into one state. In particular
if Eve uses Bob's method and obtains -1 with Z, the resulting qubit must fall into
the state $\ket{1}$, as $\ket{1}\bra{1}\left(\ket{0} + \ket{1}\right) = \ket{1}$. The key point here is that whatever Eve does Bob will still only measure -1 with some probability, meaning
that the qubits that Eve knows the encoding of are not guaranteed to be the ones that
Bob knows the encoding of.

I am hand-waving here by not giving a full analysis of the security, however
I only wanted to place the idea down in a simple format to provide something
to think about, for those who find this concept interesting.
I would like to acknowledge the lecturers of
Bristols Quantum Information course as this method is
adapted from their notes. It
is based on a paper by Bennet [explained here](http://www.cki.au.dk/experiment/qrypto/doc/QuCrypt/b92coding.html).
